Well, Harry, what brings you out so early? I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five.
Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. I want to get something out of you.
Money, I suppose, Well, sit down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything.
Yes, and when they grow older they know it. But I don t want money. It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information.
Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they let them in now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.
Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George,
Mr. Dorian Gray? Who is he?
That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know who he is. He is the last Lord Kelso s grandson. His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. What was she like? Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her. I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present. I have only just met him.
Kelso s grandson! Kelso s grandson! ... Of course.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at her christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. There was an ugly story about it. They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public paid him, sir, to do it, paid him and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again. Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girl died, too, died within a year. So she left a son, did she? I had forgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap.
He is very good-looking,
I hope he will fall into proper hands, He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog. He was, too. Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, I was ashamed of him. The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. They made quite a story of it. I didn t dare show my face at Court for a month. I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies.
I don t know, I fancy that the boy will be well off. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ... his mother was very beautiful?
Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington was mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that family were. The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful. Carlington went on his knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed at him, and there wasn t a girl in London at the time who wasn t after him. And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American? Ain t English girls good enough for him?
It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George.
I ll back English women against the world, Harry,
The betting is on the Americans.
They don t last, I am told,
A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase. They take things flying. I don t think Dartmoor has a chance.
Who are her people? Has she got any?
American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past,
They are pork-packers, I suppose?
I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor s sake. I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics.
Is she pretty?
She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do. It is the secret of their charm.
Why can t these American women stay in their own country? They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women.
It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it, Good-bye, Uncle George. I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones.
Where are you lunching, Harry?
At Aunt Agatha s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray. He is her latest _prot g _.
Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads.
All right, Uncle George, I ll tell her, but it won t have any effect. Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their distinguishing characteristic.
Late as usual, Harry,
We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry, Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?
I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess.
How dreadful! Really, some one should interfere.
I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store,
My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.
Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?
American novels,
Don t mind him, my dear, He never means anything that he says.
When America was discovered,
I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all! Really, our girls have no chance nowadays. It is most unfair.
Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered, I myself would say that it had merely been detected.
Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants, I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris. I wish I could afford to do the same.
They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,
Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?
They go to America,
I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country, I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it.
But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated? I don t feel up to the journey.
Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.
How dreadful! I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. There is something unfair about its use. It is hitting below the intellect.
I do not understand you,
I do, Lord Henry,
Paradoxes are all very well in their way....
Was that a paradox? I did not think so. Perhaps it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality we must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them.
Dear me! how you men argue! I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed with you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love his playing.
I want him to play to me,
But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,
I can sympathize with everything except suffering, I cannot sympathize with that. It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life s sores, the better.
Still, the East End is a very important problem,
Quite so, It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves.
What change do you propose, then?
I don t desire to change anything in England except the weather, I am quite content with philosophic contemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.
But we have such grave responsibilities,
Terribly grave,
Humanity takes itself too seriously. It is the world s original sin. If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different.
You are really very comforting, I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End. For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush.
A blush is very becoming, Duchess,
Only when one is young, When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again.
Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?
A great many, I fear,
Then commit them over again, To get back one s youth, one has merely to repeat one s follies.
A delightful theory! I must put it into practice.
A dangerous theory!
Yes, that is one of the great secrets of life. Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one s mistakes.
How annoying! I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn t have a scene in this bonnet. It is far too fragile. A harsh word would ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am sure I don t know what to say about your views. You must come and dine with us some night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?
For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess,
Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you, so mind you come
You talk books away, why don t you write one?
I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature.
I fear you are right, I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?
I quite forget what I said, Was it all very bad?
Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible. But I should like to talk to you about life. The generation into which I was born was tedious. Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.
I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege. It has a perfect host, and a perfect library.
You will complete it, And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. I am due at the Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep there.
All of you, Mr. Erskine?
Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English Academy of Letters.
I am going to the park,
Let me come with you,
But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,
I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do let me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so wonderfully as you do.
Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day, All I want now is to look at life. You may come and look at it with me, if you care to.