You must lend me these, Basil, I want to learn them. They are perfectly charming.
That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.
Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don t want a life-sized portrait of myself,
I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn t know you had any one with you.
This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything.
You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray, My aunt has often spoken to me about you. You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.
I am in Lady Agatha s black books at present, I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. We were to have played a duet together three duets, I believe. I don t know what she will say to me. I am far too frightened to call.
Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite devoted to you. And I don t think it really matters about your not being there. The audience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.
That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me,
You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray far too charming.
Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?
Am I to go, Mr. Gray?
Oh, please don t, Lord Henry. I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can t bear him when he sulks. Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.
I don t know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray. It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. You don t really mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to.
If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay. Dorian s whims are laws to everybody, except himself.
You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street. I am nearly always at home at five o clock. Write to me when you are coming. I should be sorry to miss you.
Basil, if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Ask him to stay. I insist upon it.
Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me, It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.
But what about my man at the Orleans?
I don t think there will be any difficulty about that. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says. He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself.
Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry? As bad as Basil says?
There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray. All influence is immoral immoral from the scientific point of view.
Why?
Because to influence a person is to give him one s own soul. He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. The aim of life is self-development. To realize one s nature perfectly that is what each of us is here for. People are afraid of themselves, nowadays. They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one s self. Of course, they are charitable. They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar. But their own souls starve, and are naked. Courage has gone out of our race. Perhaps we never really had it. The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion these are the two things that govern us. And yet
Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy,
And yet, I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of medi valism, and return to the Hellenic ideal to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives. We are punished for our refusals. Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us. The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification. Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful. It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain. It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also. You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame
Stop! stop! you bewilder me. I don t know what to say. There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it. Don t speak. Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not to think.
Basil, I am tired of standing, I must go out and sit in the garden. The air is stifling here.
My dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can t think of anything else. But you never sat better. You were perfectly still. And I have caught the effect I wanted the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. I don t know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. I suppose he has been paying you compliments. You mustn t believe a word that he says.
He has certainly not been paying me compliments. Perhaps that is the reason that I don t believe anything he has told me.
You know you believe it all, I will go out to the garden with you. It is horribly hot in the studio. Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it.
Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want. I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on. Don t keep Dorian too long. I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my masterpiece. It is my masterpiece as it stands.
You are quite right to do that, Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.
Yes, that is one of the great secrets of life to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. You are a wonderful creation. You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know.
Let us go and sit in the shade, Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. It would be unbecoming.
What can it matter?
It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray.
Why?
Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having.
I don t feel that, Lord Henry.
No, you don t feel it now. Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly. Now, wherever you go, you charm the world. Will it always be so? ... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray. Don t frown. You have. And beauty is a form of genius is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon. It cannot be questioned. It has its divine right of sovereignty. It makes princes of those who have it. You smile? Ah! when you have lost it you won t smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is. To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders. It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you. But what the gods give they quickly take away. You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully. When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats. Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful. Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses. You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. You will suffer horribly.... Ah! realize your youth while you have it. Don t squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar. These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age. Live! Live the wonderful life that is in you! Let nothing be lost upon you. Be always searching for new sensations. Be afraid of nothing.... A new Hedonism that is what our century wants. You might be its visible symbol. With your personality there is nothing you could not do. The world belongs to you for a season.... The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be. There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself. I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted. For there is such a little time that your youth will last such a little time. The common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again. The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now. In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. But we never get back our youth. The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish. Our limbs fail, our senses rot. We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to. Youth! Youth! There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!
I am waiting, Do come in. The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks.
You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray,
Yes, I am glad now. I wonder shall I always be glad?
Always! That is a dreadful word. It makes me shudder when I hear it. Women are so fond of using it. They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever. It is a meaningless word, too. The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer.
In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,
It is quite finished,
My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly, It is the finest portrait of modern times. Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself.
Is it really finished?
Quite finished, And you have sat splendidly to-day. I am awfully obliged to you.
That is entirely due to me, Isn t it, Mr. Gray?
Don t you like it?
Of course he likes it, Who wouldn t like it? It is one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything you like to ask for it. I must have it.
It is not my property, Harry.
Whose property is it?
Dorian s, of course,
He is a very lucky fellow.
How sad it is! How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful. But this picture will remain always young. It will never be older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that for that I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!
You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil, It would be rather hard lines on your work.
I should object very strongly, Harry,
I believe you would, Basil. You like your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than a green bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say.
Yes, I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when one loses one s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. Your picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. Youth is the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.
Dorian! Dorian! don t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things, are you? you who are finer than any of them!
I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep what I must lose? Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paint it? It will mock me some day mock me horribly!
This is your doing, Harry,
It is the real Dorian Gray that is all.
It is not.
If it is not, what have I to do with it?
You should have gone away when I asked you,
I stayed when you asked me,
Harry, I can t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.
Don t, Basil, don t! It would be murder!
I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian, I never thought you would.
Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself. I feel that.
Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself.
You will have tea, of course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simple pleasures?
I adore simple pleasures, They are the last refuge of the complex. But I don t like scenes, except on the stage. What absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. It was the most premature definition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he is not, after all though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. You had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn t really want it, and I really do.
If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you! and I don t allow people to call me a silly boy.
You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before it existed.
And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don t really object to being reminded that you are extremely young.
I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.
Ah! this morning! You have lived since then.
Let us go to the theatre to-night, There is sure to be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour.
It is such a bore putting on one s dress-clothes, And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.
Yes, the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life.
You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.
Before which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one in the picture?
Before either.
I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry,
Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won t you?
I can t, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do.
Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray.
I should like that awfully.
I shall stay with the real Dorian,
Is it the real Dorian? Am I really like that?
Yes; you are just like that.
How wonderful, Basil!
At least you are like it in appearance. But it will never alter, That is something.
What a fuss people make about fidelity! Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say.
Don t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian, Stop and dine with me.
I can t, Basil.
Why?
Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.
He won t like you the better for keeping your promises. He always breaks his own. I beg you not to go.
I entreat you.
I must go, Basil,
Very well, It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon. Come to-morrow.
Certainly.
You won t forget?
No, of course not,
And ... Harry!
Yes, Basil?
Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning.
I have forgotten it.
I trust you.
I wish I could trust myself, Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place. Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon.